The practice of yoga leads individual consciousness to
unite with universal consciousness,
creating a greater balance between mind and body, and between man and nature.
[Music] The
science of yoga originated thousands of
years
ago, even before the birth of the first systems of religion and belief.
Based on yogic writings, Shiva, the first yogi or Adi Yogi,
disseminated his profound knowledge to his seven disciples, the famous Sapta Rishis or Seven Sages.
[Music]
Yoga has been practiced since pre-Vedic times,
but Maharishi Patanjali,
considered the father of modern yoga, was the first to
systematize and codify the practice of that time in his Yoga Sutras.
Later, many yoga gurus
contributed to the preservation and development of this knowledge
and spread this amazing practice. There are
various schools of yoga,
including Jnana Yoga, Bhakti Yoga, Karma Yoga, Patanjali Yoga, Hatha Yoga, Kundalini Yoga, Dhyana Yoga,
Mantra Yoga,
Laya Yoga, Jain Yoga, Buddhist Yoga, etc.
Each school has its own methods
and practices that guide towards the main goals and objectives of yoga.
Some of the major forms are:  The
yoga practices that can be practiced are Yama
Niyama,
Asana,
Pranayama,
Pratyahara, Dharana,
Dhyana, Samadhi,
Bandha Mudra,
Sat Karma, Yukt Hara, Mantra Japa
and Yukt
Karma. The practitioner of yoga should
follow some guiding principles mentioned here while practicing yoga.
Before practice, yoga should be done
in an environment of peace and joy with a calm body and mind.
It should be done on an empty stomach or on a light stomach.
If you feel weak,
drink lukewarm water mixed with honey
for ease of body movements.
Light and comfortable cotton clothes should be
preferred for those suffering from any chronic disease,
pain or heart related problem.
Consult a doctor or yoga therapist before practicing yoga.
During practice, practice sessions should be
started with prayer or Vandana
as this creates a conducive environment for peace of mind.
Yoga exercises should be done
slowly in a stress-free manner
with awareness of the body and breath. Do
not hold the breath unless asked to do so. Do
not keep the body tense or jerky.
Practice according to your abilities.
End the session with deep silence or peace.  From the text to the
practice session, what is it Welcome to this essence of knowledge
As relevant and
beneficial as it is for
thousands, it is the same even today
[Music]
And today here as India leads 191
countries in celebrating the first ever
International Yoga
Day A 1400 meter stretch of Rajpath with more than
35000 people gathered here to do yoga to
practice yoga And it would also be
important to note that the NCC is
organizing the largest ever day of
yoga on a single day Currently at 1900
centers across India and to achieve this feat
by the participation of over 10 lakh
cadets And these cadets have been training
from April to June at 2700 centers
across the nation with 1800 instructors
Yoga is the easiest way to bring happiness, peace and spiritual joy to life
Yoga is
taking the form of a movement all over the world and is
moving towards becoming an integral part of life Due to this
importance of yoga and its worldwide popularity  The popularity and
importance of Yoga has been acknowledged by the entire world and it is due to this that the
first International Yoga Day
main function is being held today at the historic Rajpath.
On the occasion of Yoga festival, Yogic methods cover all fields of our existence
from the physical, the sensory, the emotional, the mental
and the spiritual to the ultimate
self-realization. In fact, it includes the method
of high evolution in humanity,
physical postures, ethical postures, breath
control, sensory methods, affirmations and
visualizations, prayers and mantras and
complexes the nature and the
interrelationships of the various forms of the
human body, the physical subtle and the formless
universes into the boundless, infinite bound of
time and space and shows us how each of us lives in
human
individual. On the occasion of the first International Yoga Day, a
large number of participants gathered
at Rajpath and in the lanes situated to its north and south to imbibe this unique process of Yoga.
Yoga guru Swami Ramdev was present in large numbers
on the occasion.  Intellectual spiritual
knowledge A means to remove all the distortions of body, mind and soul
Leads all human beings towards excellence The
aim of yoga is to discipline the intellect, mind, emotions and desires
Balance of the soul and spirit so that any
person can see all the situations of life with equanimity
The core principle of human
existence is
balance today Our lives are stressful The
pace is fast and the distractions many It is
through some time tested tools
and methods that the beginning of a physical
exercise brings in a sense balance But the
most beautiful part is that yoga is not
limited to physical
exertion The as are positioned in such a manner and are
handed out by the guru to the disciple By the
teacher to the student in such a manner that keeps in
mind the special needs of the
individual To invest in our health, body, mind
and spirit is the biggest
investment that we can make in our lives
Today
yoga is included in the six medical systems of Vedic philosophy
Maharishi Patanjali, considered the father of yoga, in
his book Yoga  In the Sutras,
various aspects of Yoga have been systematically
presented.
He has described eight paths of practicing Yoga for the all-round development of mankind,
which are known as Ashtanga Yoga. These are the rules:
Yama, Niyama, Asana, Pranayama, Pratyahara, Dharana, Dhyana
and Samadhi. Information has been given about
restraint and adherence in these components of the Yoga process, physical
exercise, breath control, control over senses, meditation,
concentration and Samadhi. The
medium to present these aspects to the entire world is
International Yoga Day. The
first event was organised at the
historic Rajpath of the capital Delhi. A
large number of
participants were present here with full enthusiasm and dedication to
give a lively form to this event.
To see Yoga as a way of life, it is something that has
carried on for centuries. Even today there are
millions of people around the world for the
benefits of this
philosophy: to work the body, to work the
mind and to work the spirit in
tandem, provided by this philosophy. There are very few
forms of exercise, or philosophy: to
work the three
shims: the breath, the we take.  In the oxygen we
take in is the single most important connect
of the human being to life
Regulated breath is something that is critical
for providing good quality of life Prime
Minister Mr. Narendra Modi arriving at
the venue and greeted by the official and of
course upaj from the
crowd Arrival of
Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi on the occasion of the first International Yoga Day
Official
recognition of India's incomparable contribution to the entire world as International Yoga Day
Honorable Prime Minister accepting the greetings
People present
[applause]
Group The throne has the
divine
power to illuminate the world in a single occasion Hearty congratulations to all of you on International Yoga Day
Now we request the Rebel Minister
of State Independent Charge Shri Shripad
Yashu Nayak to please deliver the
welcome address Kindly deliver the welcome
address
Most
Respected Honorable Prime Minister
Respected Swami Ramdev
Ji Respected Doctor Nagendra Ji Respected
Swami Atma Priyanandansex
Present in this historic event are
Honorable Lieutenant Governor of Delhi
Honorable Chief Minister of Delhi Honorable Ministers
Honorable MPs Honorable MLAs  Hello young Yogi
brothers, sisters and dear
children, while addressing the United Nations General Assembly on September 27, 2014, the
Honorable Prime Minister of India, Shri Narendra
Modi, called upon the world community to
celebrate International Yoga Day. On
December 11, 2014, the United Nations General Assembly
unanimously approved the proposal for 177 days to celebrate International Yoga Day on June 21. Receiving the
support of 177 countries within just 75 days is
a record.
It is a matter of enthusiasm and pride for all of us. Honorable
Prime Minister, the historic and far-reaching work you have done by
granting the status of Ministry to the Department of AYUSH for the rapid development of Yoga and Indian medical systems has
won the hearts of Yoga practitioners associated with all Yoga institutions and doctors associated with Indian medicine. On behalf of all of them,
I express my gratitude to you. Yoga is an
ancient tradition of our country.
It is an invaluable gift given to the world by the sages and saints of our country.
Today, the entire world has
realized the importance of Yoga and this is the
reason why people across the world are adopting it very rapidly.  You are
adopting yoga. Most respected
Prime Minister, you have taken time out from your busy schedule and have come
here today. I
heartily welcome you on behalf of my ministry.
Respected Swami Ramdev ji
is renowned as a yoga guru not only in India but across the world.
Swami ji has made a remarkable contribution in spreading yoga among the common people of India.
I
respectfully welcome you. Respected
Nagendra ji is the Chancellor of Swami
Vivekananda Yoga Research Institute
University located in Bangalore. In the past,
you have worked as a consultant at Harvard University in America
and as a
researcher at the space agency NASA.
This program is being completed with your invaluable support.
I
heartily welcome you. Swami Atma
Priyanandansex has a
history of 100 years. I heartily
welcome you.
Present to participate in this function are the Honorable
Union Ministers, Honorable Lieutenant Governor of Delhi, Honorable Chief Minister,
Honorable MPs,
respected diplomats and citizens from various countries,
Yoga practitioners from all yoga institutions, NCC cadets,
school students, NSS volunteers, Delhi
Police, Army, Paramilitary Force soldiers, Sir,
officers and employees.  People and friends from the press media,
I heartily welcome you all.
Thank you very much. Jai
Hind. Thank you Honorable Shri Shripad Naik.
In 1893 in Chicago, Swami Vivekananda had
told what India can offer to the
world. What can India give to the world?
Honorable Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi has
illuminated the world with the aura of India. He has done
revolutionary work by uniting the world through Yoga. He has fulfilled our belief
Vasudev Kutumbakam i.e. The Whole World is
Like a Family. Today the
whole world is eager to hear your auspicious words.
Honorable, I request the
noble Prime Minister of India Shri
Narendra Modi ji to kindly address us
[praise]
my colleagues in the Council of Ministers,
Shriman Shripad Nayak
ji, Doctor Nagendra
ji, Respected Baba Ramdev ji,
Respected Atma Priyanand
ji, Respected Hansa
ji, Secretary Shriman Syal ji
and all the great people associated with Yoga across the country
[music]
and across the world. Would
anyone have ever thought
that Rajpath can
also become the path of Yoga?
Today, through the UNO, International
[Music]
Yoga Day is beginning,
but I believe that
today, June 21st,
International
Yoga Day marks the
beginning of not just a day of celebration,
but
a new era of training the human mind to achieve these heights of peace and harmony. [Music]
Sometimes, ignorance about many things leads to
some distortions.
This tradition has been going on for centuries. Over
time,
many things have been added to it.
I
would like to say today that for centuries, the
great men, the sages, the
monks, the yoga
gurus, the yoga teachers, the yoga practitioners who have carried
forward this tradition for centuries have
also added points of development to it. Today, I
respectfully bow to such great personalities of the entire world
and I honor them.
I believe that the region in which this scripture originated and the region to which it has spread does not matter much to me.
[Music] What matters is that
every kind of revolution is taking place in the world.
Humans are reaching new heights of development.
Technology has
become a part of human life, and everything else is
progressing.
Everything else is progressing at a fast pace, but it should
not happen that humans remain the same.
If humans remain the same and all
these systems develop in the world, then
this mismatch can also become a problem for the human race
and hence it is necessary that humans should also
develop internally and progress.
Today, the world has
yoga, a science in which
people of many colors and people of many traditions from many parts of the world have
contributed their own. Accepting the yoga of all of them,
how to develop the inner mind, how to
strengthen the inner energy, how to
free a human being from a stress-free life and pave a
life on the path of peace.
In most people's minds,
yoga means a program of body massage.
I think this is the biggest
mistake.
Yoga is not a program of body massage.
If this were the case, then children working in circuses would be
called yogis. And therefore,
just how much we make the body flexible and
how much we bend it is not yoga. We have
sometimes seen that a
big musical event is going on and at the
beginning of the musical event, the people playing the instruments keep
hitting in their own way.
Someone fixes the strings, someone fixes the tabla,
someone fixes the drum, it takes
five to seven minutes and the audience
sometimes wonders when will we start, just like
before the music starts, there is a rhythm program
and later a melodious music comes out,
this rhythm program is
very small in the entire music concert,
these asanas are also as much a part of the entire yoga state, the
rest of the journey is very long
and hence it became necessary to know and recognize that
and we are trying to take it in that direction.
Today I
express my gratitude to the UNO, I express my gratitude to the 193 countries of the world
who
unanimously passed such a resolution
and I express my gratitude to those 177 countries
who
accepted the greatness of yoga by becoming Kos Pandit and today, from where the
first ray of the sun started
and where the last ray of the sun will reach after 24 hours, there will be no such
ray of the sun, there will be no
such journey of the sun which has
not got the opportunity to bless these yoga practitioners. For the
first time, the world will have to accept that
Today,
this
sun never sets from the place of yoga practice.
That entire cycle where the sun goes, yoga
practice will be present there. It has reached the world today.
Yoga plays a huge role in achieving a state where the mind, intellect, body, soul, all should be balanced, integrated and at ease.
Today, at the beginning of this great festival,
this is a program solely for human welfare. It is a
program for a stress-free world. It is a
program to spread the message of love, peace, unity and goodwill and to
implement it in life. I extend my
heartfelt best
wishes for this program. Today,
in every street and locality of India,
we will continuously take forward the environment of yoga that has been created.
With this one expectation,
my best
wishes to all of you. Thank you very much, Honorable
Prime Minister. The life of the Honorable Prime Minister is
his message. May the
hearts of all be equal and the resolutions and desires of all people be
equal. With this auspicious wish, come, get
ready for yoga. A
live demonstration of yoga will be done here. You all are
kindly requested to follow the common yoga
protocol. Postures by looking at the LED
screen placed in front of you.  The
proceedings will be conducted by Dr. Ishwar
Vasava Reddy, Director,
National Institute of Yoga. Now I hand
over the proceedings to Dr. Ishwar Vasava
Reddy, Director, National Institute of Yoga.
You will follow and perform the yoga asanas by looking at the LED screen. The
Honorable Prime Minister is
arriving at Rajpat. It is our good fortune that the
Honorable Prime Minister is among us today.
His presence is like a blessing
for all of us and for this country. It is a good fortune that the
Honorable Prime Minister himself is participating today.
Thank you very much Honorable
Prime Minister.
[Music]
Namaskar, a hearty welcome to all of you.
Welcome everyone to the yoga session.
Let's all begin the yoga practice
with a prayer. Let's begin the yoga sadhana with prayer.
Please sit in a comfortable seated posture.
Sit comfortably in any meditative posture. Gently close your eyes for prayer. Bring your palms together in
Namaskar Mudra.
Join the hands at the back. Chant Om three times. All
together. Follow by a prayer. Chant Om three times. All together.  We will do it
and then
repeat the prayer
[Music]
Satvam
Samvat Vam Satvam
Samadam So Manam Sa
Janta Sango
Mana Se Ja Deva Bhagam Yatha Purve Deva Bhagam Yatha Purve Sanja Nana Upa Sate Sanja Nana Upa Sate Sanja Nana Upaas Sanja
Nana
[Music]
Upaas
Sanjna Na
Upaas Sanjna Upaas
Gently
open your eyes and
bring your hands back Please stand up for loosening
practices Now
stand up at your place to practice the Chalana Kriyas These
Practices Help in Micro Circulation
This practice is helpful in increasing the subtle circulation of the body Begin with Neck
Bending We will
start with the practice of neck bending Kriya
Keep a gap of 1 inch between the feet
Place your arms on your waist Keep your hands on the waist
Slowly bend your head forward while exhaling Take your
head
back while inhaling Bring your head
back to normal position Exhale
Bring the head to the normal position Right and Left Neck Bending Practice Right and
Left Neck Bending Practice Bend the
head to the right While exhaling, bend the head to the right. Inhale
and bring the head back. While inhaling,
bring the head back.
Bend the head to the left While exhaling, bend
the head to the left.
Bring the head back to the normal position. Bring the head back to the normal position.
Neck Twisting Practice Neck Twisting Practice Bend the
head to the right While exhaling, take the head to the right. Inhale and
bring the head back. While inhaling,
come to the normal position.
Now, turn the head to the left while exhaling.
Inhale and bring your head back to the
normal position. Now, Neck Rotation
Practice Neck Rotation Practice Bend
the chin down towards the
chest While exhaling, place the chin at the throat pit.
Inhale and slowly rotate the
head clockwise. While inhaling, turn the head clockwise.  Take your head back in clockwise direction.
Exhale. Come down and
come forward. Now rotate your head in an anti-
clockwise direction. Now turn your head in the opposite direction.
Inhale. Go back. Take your head
back while inhaling. Exhale. Come down and bring it
forward. Inhale. Bring your head to
normal
position while inhaling. Bring your head to normal position. Now bring your arms
down and bring your hands back. Let us move on
to trunk twisting. Next exercise: Kati
Chalan Kriya. Keep
your legs shoulder length apart. Keep your feet shoulder width apart.
Raise your arms to the level of your
chest. Raise your hands in line with your shoulders towards the
front. Exhale the
body towards the right while exhaling. Turn
the body to the right.
Inhale.
Come back and
bring your arms down while exhaling. Turn the body to the left while exhaling. Now moving on to knee
moments.  Knee Movement
Practice Inhale Lift your arms to shoulder
level While inhaling bring your hands in
front of you to shoulder level Single Bend Knee and come to
sitting position Exhale
bend your knees and come to sitting position
Inhale and come up While inhaling come back
Again Exhale and go down Exhale come
back to sitting position Again come up While inhaling bring your
arms down and relax While exhaling bring your
hands back down To
Begin Yogasana Practice Now we will
practice Yogasanas Tadasana
Stand with your feet
two inches apart Keep a gap of two inches between the feet Inhale Bring your
arms up to shoulder level Inhale and bring your
hands in front of you to shoulder level Interlock your fingers and turn the wrists outwards
Interlock your palms and turn the
palms upside down Inhale Raise your arms up While inhaling take your
hands up
Raise the heels of the floor Balance on your toes while
lifting your heels  Balance on the toes This
asana brings stability and strength
to the body This asana brings balance and
strength to the body Bring the heels down
Bring the heels back Axle Arms down
and relax While exhaling
bring the hands to the normal position
Vrksasana Axle Bend the right leg While
exhaling bend the right leg Place the
foot on the inside of the left thigh
Try to place the right sole on the place of the left foot
Inhale Bring the arms up and join the palms While inhaling
raise your hands and join the palms This asana improves
neuro muscular coordination This asana improves neuro muscular coordination
Axle Bring the arms and leg down While exhaling bring the
hands and right leg
down Now will repeat Vrksasana on the other
side Now will repeat this asana with the other leg Bend the
left leg Place the foot
on the inside of the right thigh Bend the left foot
and place it on the place of the right foot Inhale Bring the arms up and join the palms While inhaling raise
your
hands  lift up  Join the palms
Stretch and maintain the posture
[music] Stretch while exhaling and
bring the hands and feet down Now we move on to Padahastasana
Now we will practice Padahastasana Stand
with your feet four
inches apart Inhale and raise the arms up While inhaling, bring the
hands up Exhale
slowly
bend forward While exhaling, slowly bend forward Stretch from the waist
Try to stretch the waist Keep your palms
beside the feet Keep your palms
near the toes This asana makes the spine
flexible and helps digestion This asana
makes our spine flexible and
improves digestion Now inhale bring your
arms down Now while inhaling, slowly come back up Bring
your arms down and relax
Exhale bring both the hands down
and relax Ardha Chakrasana Place your
hands at the back of your waist Keep your hands
behind the waist Keep your elbows
parallel to each other Keep both your knees
parallel  Inhale and drop the head backwards While
inhaling, take the head back
Exhale and maintain the
breath and try to remain in the posture
Asanas help to improve breathing capacity This
asana helps in breathing Inhale Raise your head up While inhaling,
bring the head back
Single arms down and relax Exhale and
bring the hands back Now move to
Trikonasana Put your hands on your waist Place
both hands on the waist Stand with your
feet three to four feet apart
Keep a distance of three to four feet between both the feet Inhale
Raise your arms up to shoulder level While
inhaling, spread both the hands shoulder width
Turn your right foot towards the
right side Turn the toes of the right foot towards the right
Exhale slowly bending to the
right side Place the right hand behind the right leg Place the right hand
behind the right foot
Turn your head and gaze at your middle
finger Turn your head upwards and
look at the middle finger  Asanas Help in
Treating Cervical Spondylitis This asana
helps in curing cervical spondylitis Inhale and slowly come up While
inhaling, slowly bring your right
foot back and turn your left foot towards
the left side Straighten the toes of your right foot back
Now turn the toes of your left foot towards the
left side Exhale and
slowly
bend to the left side Place your left hand behind the left leg Place the
left hand
behind the left leg Turn your head and gaze at your
middle finger Turn your head upwards
and gaze at the middle finger Maintain the
posture Try to maintain the position
Bring your arms down and feet together
Join both the legs and bring the hands back as well Now will
move on to sitting
posture Sit down and leg stretch out Slowly
sit down and straighten the legs towards the front Keep
your hands beside the hips and back
straight Keep the hands near the buttocks and
straighten the waist This Dandasana is Dandasana  Bend your knees
and put the soles of your feet together.
Bend your legs from the knees and join both the soles.
Hold your toes while exhaling. Pull
your arms out of the body. Bring your arms towards the body. The main focus
of the asana is on the mind. This asana
strengthens the body and keeps the mind steady.
Stretch your legs. Come back to Dandasana. Slowly come back to
Dandasana. Ardha
Ustrasana
Legs under your body. For practice,
bend your legs and come on your knees. Sit between your
heels and knees together.
Sit between your ankles while joining your knees. This is
Vajrasana. This is Vajrasana. Now Stand on your
knees. Slowly stand on your knees.
Place the hands on the waist. Place your hands
behind your waist. Bend the head back and
relax while inhaling.
Bend your head backwards. Asana
Treating Back Pain This asana
is helpful in curing back pain. Inhale. Raise your head up.  Inhale and slowly
come back
to Vajrasana Stretch your legs out Sit in Dandasana and relax Open your
legs and come back to Dandasana Now we move on to Vakrasana Now we will practice Vakrasana Bend the right leg and place the right foot
beside the left knee Slowly bend the right leg Place the toes of the right foot near the left knee Bring the left arm around the right
knee and
place the
palm beside the right foot Rolling your left hand
over the right knee
Place the body to the right and turn it towards the right foot. While
exhaling, bend the head and body towards the right side.
This
brings flexibility in the spine. Turn the head back. While
inhaling, bring the head back. Release the arms and
legs. While exhaling, come back to the normal position.
Now we will repeat the same on the other side. Repeat
this asana on the left side as well. Bend
the left leg and place the left foot beside
the right knee. Slowly bend the
left leg. Place the left toe near the right knee. Bring the right arm
around the left knee. Place the palm beside the left
foot. Roll your right
hand over the left knee and
place it near
the left toe. Exhale and
move the body to the left and turn the head back. Release the arms and stretch the leg.
Slowly come back and straighten the legs.
Relax to Vishram
Asana. Now let's move to prone posture. Now we will
practice the pose done by lying on the stomach. Bring
down your legs.  Relax in Makarasana
Lie down on your stomach in Makarasana.
Begin with
Bhujangasana. We will practice Bhujangasana. Join
your legs together. Join both the legs. While inhaling,
straighten both your arms. Place your arms on the
side of the body in line with your chest. While
exhaling, bend your arms and place your
palms near the chest.
Lift
your chin up till the navel area.
Asana for Stress Management This asana
helps in relieving stress.
Now while exhaling, come back to the normal position.
Relax in Makarasana. Relax in Makarasana. Join your
legs and put the arms on the side of the
body. Join both the legs. Bring your hands
near the thighs. Keep your arms facing upwards. Keep
the chin grounded. Place your palms towards the sky. Keep your chin touching the ground. And
raise your legs while inhaling. This asana helps to prevent Sciatica.
Relieves back pain Lie down and bring the legs down While exhaling, bring
your legs down
Now we will rest in Makarasana
Relax in Makarasana Keep
your feet wide apart Keep a little gap between your feet
Rest your head on the palms Place your head on the palms
and relax Relax Now we will
relax the body and the mind This
asana balances the body and mind
[music] Now we will learn to balance
posture Now we
will practice asanas done while lying down on your back Lay down on your back
Setu
Bandhasana Now we will practice Setu Bandhasana Bend both your knees
and bring your ankles close to your knees Bend both your knees and
bring your ankles close to your knees Hold your ankles and hold your hips in a
bridge Breathing out, raise
your legs and waist upwards
Maintain the posture This asana Strengthens the abdomen
and decreases depression This asana tightens the abdominal organs
and reduces stress
Exhale and lower back Stretch your
legs Straighten your legs
Relax on your back Rest on your back in
Pawan Muktasana
Join your legs Bend the knees and bring the thighs to the chest Bend the knees and bring the thighs close to the
chest Interlock your fingers and hold the legs Interlock the
fingers of your hands and hold the head up Raise your
head while exhaling
Maintain the posture
Try to maintain this asana This asana improves digestion This asana
improves digestion Exhale Bring the head
down Now bring the head back while exhaling
Stretch your legs and relax
Slowly straighten both the legs Now
relax in
Shavasana Now we will relax in Shavasana Keep
your arms and legs apart
Maintain proper distance between the feet and hands Palms facing the sky Keep the
palms towards the sky
Gently close your eyes Close your eyes Take a
deep breath and
axle Take a deep breath and exhale Relax each
and every part of your body  Your body from your toes
to your head Be aware of each part of the body Be
mindful of the entire body The
asana relieves all kinds of tension This asana releases
all kinds of stress
[music]
Now Come back to a comfortable seated position Come back
slowly and
sit in any comfortable posture Now perform Kapalabhati Get
ready to practice Kapalabhati
Sit in any meditative posture with your back straight Sit in
any meditative posture with your waist and neck straight Keep your
hands on your knees Keep your hands
in Gyan Mudra Slowly
and exhale the breath Forcefully
contract the lower muscles Inhale deeply and
exhale while pressing the lower muscles Let's begin our first
round of 30 strokes Kapalabhati
Begin the first round of Kapalabhati.
Expand and
relax Exhale deeply and experience peace
Now we move on to the second round of
30 strokes Now begin the second round of Kapalabhati  This
can be seen on the right side.
Exhale and relax. Take a deep breath
and relax.
Now we get ready for the final round.
Now get ready for the third and final round.
Exhale and relax. Take a deep breath
and relax. Kapalabhati Revitalizes our mind
and body. Kapalabhati
energizes the body. Now we proceed to Nadi
Shodhan Pranayama. Now we will practice Anulom Vilom
Pranayama. Keep the left palm on the left knee.
Make Gyan Mudra with the left hand. Make Gyan Mudra with the right hand.
Make Nasal Anghra Mudra with the right hand. Inhale through the left nostril. Inhale
slowly through the
left nostril. Exhale through the right nostril.
Again, inhale through the right nostril. Now exhale through the left nostril.
Exhale through the left nostril.
This is one round. Repeat in another four rounds.
This is one round of Anulom Vilom. Practice four more such
rounds
[Music]
Nadi  Shodhana Pranayama Helps
Concentration Nadi Shodhana Pranayama
Increases Aagra
[Music]
Exhale and Hands Down
Bring the Hands Down Now Let's Begin Bhramari
Pranayama Now we will practice Bhramari Pranayama Keep both hands down and knees in Gyan
Mudra Make Gyan Mudra of the hands
Close your eyes gently Close your eyes Breathe deeply slowly Make a humming sound like a
long
deep breath While exhaling
pronounce the Makar sound like a chant
Let's Begin the First
Round Begin the first round
[Music]
Breathe
Inhale
[Music]
Now we will perform Bhramari in Shanamukhi Mudra
Now we will do the same practice with Shanamukhi Mudra
Adopt Shanamukhi Mudra Let's Start the First
Round
[Music]
Breathe
[Music] Inhale Bring the Hands Down Bring the
Hands Down
Brahman Pranayama Calms the
Mind Brahman Pranayama Calms the Mind
Now It is time for Dhyana and Meditation
Now Meditation  Let's begin the practice Keep your
back straight Straighten the spine Keep your
hands on your knees in Gyan
Mudra Make your hands in Gyan Mudra and
place them on your knees
Gently close your eyes and lift the chin for
Shyam Bhavi Mudra Close your eyes gently
and lift your chin slightly Relax and
concentrate on your breath
Dill your thought and attention Single and pure thought A
state of thoughtlessness occurs Let us become a
meditator
Meditation is an important component of
yoga It keeps the mind calm and steady and
leads to self-
realization Meditation is the most important part of yoga
It keeps the mind calm and
leads us towards self-realization
[Music]
Now bring your attention to normal breathing
and make a resolution in your mind
We have to always keep our mind balanced This is where
our self-development lies
I resolve to make myself a healthy, peace-loving
and loving human being
I will try to be one with every person present here I
commit to make myself into
healthy and
peaceful  Joyful and loving human beings I
embrace the kinship of my own life with every other
life I embrace the unity of the
world Now bring your hands to Namaste
Mudra for Shanti Paath
Bring your hands in Namaskar Mudra for Shanti Paath
[Music]
O
Sarve Bhavantu
Sukhin Sarve
Sant Niramaya Sarve Bhadrani Pashyantu
Ma Kashchit Dukh Bhag
Bhave Ma Kashchit Dukh Bhag
Bhave
O Shanti
[Music]
Shanti
Shanti Bring your palms to your
eyes Now gently bring your hands
down Thank you very much for a joyful and
wonderful Yoga
Sadhana Make the possibilities
possible Make the possible
nots possible Have a
good day Shubh Din
Namaskar An unprecedented,
unforgettable and unique
moment This spectacular view and day has registered its
presence not only in our eyes and hearts but also
in the world history The
countrymen
salute and thank you very much to the Honorable Prime Minister who has
created another new history of national pride
Today the ancient Indian tradition of Yoga has set out
on the path of world welfare As far as
you can  Fly towards the sun,
India. Fly towards the sun as far as you can.
India, your shadow will spread like a shadow over the
world.
Honorable Prime Minister,
today, as the Honorable Prime Minister has said,
Rajpath has become the path of yoga. Amidst the yoga
participants, amidst
their enthusiasm, the children of future India,
and the children are also meeting them with great enthusiasm
[appreciation].
Honorable Prime Minister is
accepting their greetings and
meeting them.
It is a great fortune for these children and the countrymen
that the
Prime Minister of the country, Shri Narendra Modi himself actively participated in this
35-minute yoga session.
As I
said, the life of the Honorable Prime Minister is
his message.
You believe deeply in yoga,
and today he
supported the countrymen in yoga. You believe deeply in yoga.
Honorable Prime Minister, you
believe deeply in yoga.
Thank you very much, Honorable Prime Minister, by
showing your presence in this session today, you have
shown that you are with every human being, every Indian, you are
with them in every moment, every second.
Thank you very much, Honorable Prime Minister,
our ancient belief in yoga
Honorable Prime Minister has unwavering
faith in it.
Samatva Samatvam Yoga
Ute. Yes, where there is no ups and downs of the mind, there is
equanimity of mind, that is Yoga.
Heartfelt thanks to Honorable Prime Minister that today
he is present among us in this 35-minute session and performed
all the Yogasanas himself. 21 June 21
Yogasanas, 35000 people
for 35 minutes. Many many congratulations to all of you. Many thanks to Honorable
Prime Minister.
Many thanks to all of you. You
participated in today's program with equal enthusiasm and energy.
Today the prosperity of the country is worth seeing.
Steps towards development are moving forward and
our India has created another new record. The
world is watching the light in you. By making each
day divine, gift the faith to
history. Write the story of new light.
Rise up in the sky and hold the whole sun
in your arms. Rise up and hold the whole sun in your arms.
Thank you very much. And all the
teachers of the children are requested to
please count all the children so that
before leaving